add deploy-on-azure-aks.md for Azure AKS cluster (#1366)
pingcap/docs-tidb-operator: en/deploy-on-azure-aks.md

1. [Enable Ultra disks on an existing cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks#enable-ultra-disks-on-an-existing-cluster) and create a storage class for `UltraSSD`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
    kind: StorageClass
    metadata:
      name: ultra
    provisioner: disk.csi.azure.com
    parameters:
      skuname: UltraSSD_LRS  # alias: storageaccounttype, available values: Standard_LRS, Premium_LRS, StandardSSD_LRS, UltraSSD_LRS
      cachingMode: None
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    allowVolumeExpansion: true
    volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
    ```

    > you can add more [Driver Parameters](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver/blob/master/docs/driver-parameters.md) according to your needs.

2. In `tidb-cluster.yaml`, specify the `ultra` storage class to apply for the `UltraSSD` volume type through the `storageClassName` field.

    The following is a TiKV configuration example you can refer to:

    ```yaml
    spec:
      tikv:
        baseImage: pingcap/tikv
        replicas: 3
        storageClaims:
        - resources:
          requests:
            storage: 100Gi

>           storageClassName: ultra

Reviewer: 缩进问题

Author: fixed

Author: 这里拷贝了 eks 文档是错的，原写法好像是 tiflash 的多盘写法，我下周找 operator 老师确认一下

Author: 确认 EKS 这一块写错了，已有 pr https://github.com/pingcap/docs-tidb-operator/pull/1427 修改，此处 AKS 也对应完成修改

# create tikv node pool in zone 2
az aks nodepool add --name tikv2 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 2 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd

# create tikv node pool in zone 3
az aks nodepool add --name tikv3 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd
```

> **Warning:**
>
> About node pool scale in:
>
> * You can manually scale an AKS cluster to run a different number of nodes. When you scale down, nodes are carefully [cordoned and drained](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/) to minimize disruption to running applications, refer [Scale the node count in an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/scale-cluster).

> > * If you want to use the cluster autoscaler, you can [Change the cluster autoscaler settings](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/cluster-autoscaler#change-the-cluster-autoscaler-settings) and refer [Enable TidbCluster Auto-scaling](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/stable/enable-tidb-cluster-auto-scaling)

Reviewer 2: Please remove the reference for `Enable TidbCluster Auto-scaling`, it's not ready yet.

Author: done

For detailed CR configuration, refer to [API references](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/docs/api-references/docs.md) and [Configure a TiDB Cluster](configure-a-tidb-cluster.md).

## Deploy TiDB Enterprise Edition

To deploy TiDB/PD/TiKV/TiFlash/TiCDC Enterprise Edition, configure `spec.[tidb|pd|tikv|tiflash|ticdc].baseImage` in `tidb-cluster.yaml` as the enterprise image. The enterprise image format is `pingcap/[tidb|pd|tikv|tiflash|ticdc]-enterprise`.

For example:

```yaml
spec:
  ...
  pd:
    baseImage: pingcap/pd-enterprise
  ...
  tikv:
    baseImage: pingcap/tikv-enterprise
```

## Use other Disk volume types

Azure disks supports multiple volume types. If you need low latency and high throughput, you can choose the `UltraSSD` type. The steps are as follows:

1. [Enable Ultra disks on an existing cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks#enable-ultra-disks-on-an-existing-cluster) and create a storage class for `UltraSSD`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
    kind: StorageClass
    metadata:
      name: ultra
    provisioner: disk.csi.azure.com
    parameters:

>       skuname: UltraSSD_LRS  # alias: storageaccounttype, available values: Standard_LRS, Premium_LRS, StandardSSD_LRS, UltraSSD_LRS

Reviewer 2: We should also set the mountOptions here? Refer to #1427

Author: added

---
title: Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS
summary: Learn how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
aliases: ['/docs/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/deploy-on-azure-aks/']
---

# Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS

This document describes how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

To deploy TiDB Operator and the TiDB cluster in a self-managed Kubernetes environment, refer to [Deploy TiDB Operator](deploy-tidb-operator.md) and [Deploy TiDB in General Kubernetes](deploy-on-general-kubernetes.md).

## Prerequisites

Before deploying a TiDB cluster on Azure AKS, make sure the following requirements are satisfied:

* Install [Helm 3](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/): used for deploying TiDB Operator.
* Complete all operations in [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and [Create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks).

    This guide includes the following contents:

    * Install and configure `az cli` used for creating Kubernetes clusters.

>     * (optional) Install aks-preview CLI extension for using Ultra Disks. Create the `AKS cluster` with Ultra disks enabled, or enable Ultra disks on an existing cluster.

Author: fixed

To verify whether AZ CLI is configured correctly, run the `az login` command. If login with account credentials successfully, AZ CLI is configured correctly. Otherwise, you need to re-configure AZ CLI.

> **Note:**
>
> The operations described in this document requires these permissions [AKS service permissions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/concepts-identity#aks-service-permissions).
> need **EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver** registered in the subscription

The following command will register **EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver** in the subscription

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
az feature register --name EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver --namespace Microsoft.ContainerService --subscription ${subscription}

> ```

Author: fixed

az aks nodepool add --name admin \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=admin

# create pd node pool, the suggested nodeType is Standard_F4s_v2 or higher
az aks nodepool add --name pd \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 3 \
    --labels dedicated=pd \
    --node-taints dedicated=pd:NoSchedule

# create tidb node pool, the suggested nodeType is Standard_F8s_v2 or higher, by default only two TiDB nodes are required, so you can set the `--node-count` of the `tidb` node pool to `2`. You can scale out this node pool any time if necessary
az aks nodepool add --name tidb \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 2 \
    --labels dedicated=tidb \
    --node-taints dedicated=tidb:NoSchedule

> # create tikv node pool, the suggested nodeType is Standard_E8s_v4 or higher

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Create a TiKV node pool with `nodeType` being `Standard_E8s_v4` or higher
```

az aks nodepool add --name tikv \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 3 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd
```

> ### deploy component node pools in limited zone
> 
> Azure AKS cluster deploy nodes across multiple zones using "best effort zone balance", if you need "strict zone balance" (not supported in AKS now), consider deploy one node pool in each zone. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Deploy component node pools in limited zone

The Azure AKS cluster deploys nodes across multiple zones using "best effort zone balance". If you want to apply "strict zone balance" (not supported in AKS now), you can deploy one node pool in one zone. For example:
```

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell

> # create tikv node pool1 in zone 1
> az aks nodepool add --name tikv1 \
>     --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
>     --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
>     --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
>     --zones 1 \
>     --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
>     --node-count 1 \
>     --labels dedicated=tikv \
>     --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
>     --enable-ultra-ssd
> 
> # create tikv node pool2 in zone 2
> az aks nodepool add --name tikv2 \
>     --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
>     --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
>     --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
>     --zones 2 \
>     --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
>     --node-count 1 \
>     --labels dedicated=tikv \
>     --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
>     --enable-ultra-ssd
> 
> # create tikv node pool3 in zone 3
> az aks nodepool add --name tikv3 \
>     --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
>     --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
>     --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
>     --zones 3 \
>     --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
>     --node-count 1 \
>     --labels dedicated=tikv \
>     --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
>     --enable-ultra-ssd

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Create TiKV node pool1 in zone 1
az aks nodepool add --name tikv1 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd

# Create TiKV node pool2 in zone 2
az aks nodepool add --name tikv2 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 2 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd

# Create TiKV node pool3 in zone 3
az aks nodepool add --name tikv3 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd
```

```

> **Warning:**
>

> > About node pool scale in:
> >
> > * You can manually scale an AKS cluster to run a different number of nodes. When you scale down, nodes are carefully [cordoned and drained](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/) to minimize disruption to running applications, refer [Scale the node count in an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/scale-cluster).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> About node pool scale-in:
>
> * You can manually scale in or out an AKS cluster to run a different number of nodes. When you scale in, nodes are carefully [cordoned and drained](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/) to minimize disruption to running applications. Refer to [Scale the node count in an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/scale-cluster).
```

> ## 配置 StorageClass
> 
> for improving IO performance of Disk，it is suggested to add `mountOptions` in the StorageClass，to config `nodelalloc` and `noatime`。refer to the [Mount the data disk ext4 filesystem with options on the target machines that deploy TiKV](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/check-before-deployment#mount-the-data-disk-ext4-filesystem-with-options-on-the-target-machines-that-deploy-tikv)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Configure StorageClass

To improve disk IO performance, it is recommended to add `mountOptions` in `StorageClass` to configure `nodelalloc` and `noatime`. Refer to [Mount the data disk ext4 filesystem with options on the target machines that deploy TiKV](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/check-before-deployment#mount-the-data-disk-ext4-filesystem-with-options-on-the-target-machines-that-deploy-tikv)
```

Author: fixed en spell

```yaml
kind: StorageClass
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
# ...
mountOptions:
- nodelalloc,noatime
```

## Deploy TiDB Operator

> To deploy TiDB Operator in the AKS cluster, refer to the [*Deploy TiDB Operator* section](get-started.md#deploy-tidb-operator) in Getting Started.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deploy TiDB Operator in the AKS cluster by referring to [*Deploy TiDB Operator* section](get-started.md#deploy-tidb-operator).
```

---
title: Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS
summary: Learn how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
aliases: ['/docs/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/deploy-on-azure-aks/']
---

# Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS

This document describes how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

To deploy TiDB Operator and the TiDB cluster in a self-managed Kubernetes environment, refer to [Deploy TiDB Operator](deploy-tidb-operator.md) and [Deploy TiDB in General Kubernetes](deploy-on-general-kubernetes.md).

## Prerequisites

Before deploying a TiDB cluster on Azure AKS, perform the following operations:

* Install [Helm 3](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) for deploying TiDB Operator.

> * [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and install and configure `az cli`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Install and configure `az cli` by referring to [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster).
```

> * [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and install and configure `az cli`.

Author: 中文是 “部署 Azure Kubernetes 服务 (AKS) 群集”，  我将英文改为 Deploy

> * [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and install and configure `az cli`.

Author: done

    > **Note：**
    >
    > To verify whether AZ CLI is configured correctly, run the `az login` command. If login with account credentials succeeds, AZ CLI is configured correctly. Otherwise, you need to re-configure AZ CLI.

> * [Create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Create a cluster that can use ultra disks or enable ultra disks on an existing cluster by referring to [Create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks).
```

> * [Create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks).

Author: fixed done

* Acquire [AKS service permissions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/concepts-identity#aks-service-permissions).
* If the Kubernetes version of the cluster is earlier than 1.21, install [aks-preview CLI extension](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/custom-node-configuration#install-aks-preview-cli-extension) for using Ultra Disks by running the following command: 
    
    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    az extension add --name aks-preview
    ```

* Register [EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/csi-storage-drivers#install-csi-storage-drivers-on-a-new-cluster-with-version--121) in [your subscription](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/feature?view=azure-cli-latest#az_feature_register-optional-parameters) by running the following command:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    az feature register --name EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver --namespace Microsoft.ContainerService --subscription ${your-subscription-id}

>     ```

Author: 应该是 tab 的关系，已按照中文缩紧修改调整

>     ```

Author: Register [EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver]   这一段是包含在上面 < 1.21 版本里的，并不是单独的一段

>     ```

Author: fixed done

### View the cluster status

To view the status of the TiDB cluster, run the following command:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
kubectl get pods -n tidb-cluster
```

When all the pods are in the `Running` or `Ready` state, the TiDB cluster is successfully started. For example:

```
NAME                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
tidb-discovery-5cb8474d89-n8cxk   1/1     Running   0          47h
tidb-monitor-6fbcc68669-dsjlc     3/3     Running   0          47h
tidb-pd-0                         1/1     Running   0          47h
tidb-pd-1                         1/1     Running   0          46h
tidb-pd-2                         1/1     Running   0          46h
tidb-tidb-0                       2/2     Running   0          47h
tidb-tidb-1                       2/2     Running   0          46h
tidb-tikv-0                       1/1     Running   0          47h
tidb-tikv-1                       1/1     Running   0          47h
tidb-tikv-2                       1/1     Running   0          47h
```

## Access the database

> Having deployed a TiDB cluster, you can access the TiDB database to test or develop applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After deploying a TiDB cluster, you can access the TiDB database to test or develop applications.
```

### Access AKS node via SSH

> The LoadBalancer created for your TiDB cluster resides in an intranet. You can create a [Bastion](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/bastion/tutorial-create-host-portal) in the cluster virtual network to connect to an internal host and then access the database. 

Reviewer 4: 中文部分除了堡垒机，还提到了 SSH 和 node-shell，英文里缺失了这两块。

Author: 参考中文进行修改

Author: fixed done

> * By default, TiDB (starting from v4.0.2) periodically shares usage details with PingCAP to help understand how to improve the product. For details about what is shared and how to disable the sharing, see [Telemetry](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/telemetry).

## Access the Grafana monitoring dashboard

Obtain the LoadBalancer IP address of Grafana:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
kubectl -n tidb-cluster get svc basic-grafana
```

For example:

```
$ kubectl get svc basic-grafana
NAME            TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)          AGE
basic-grafana   LoadBalancer   10.100.199.42   20.240.0.8    3000:30761/TCP   121m
```

In the output above, the `EXTERNAL-IP` column is the LoadBalancer IP address.

You can access the `${grafana-lb}:3000` address using your web browser to view monitoring metrics. Replace `${grafana-lb}` with the LoadBalancer IP address.

> **Note:**
>
> The default Grafana username and password are both `admin`.

> ## Access the TiDB Dashboard

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Access TiDB Dashboard
```

See [Access TiDB Dashboard](access-dashboard.md) for instructions about how to securely allow access to the TiDB Dashboard.

## Upgrade

To upgrade the TiDB cluster, edit `spec.version` by running the `kubectl edit tc basic -n tidb-cluster` command.

The upgrade process does not finish immediately. You can view the upgrade progress by running the `kubectl get pods -n tidb-cluster --watch` command.

## Scale out

Before scaling out the cluster, you need to scale out the corresponding node pool so that the new instances have enough resources for operation.

This section describes how to scale out the AKS node pool and TiDB components.

### Scale out AKS node pool

When scaling out TiKV, the node pools must be scaled out evenly among availability zones. The following example shows how to scale out the TiKV node pool of the `${clusterName}` cluster to 6 nodes:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
az aks nodepool scale \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --name ${nodePoolName} \
    --node-count 6
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

For more information on node pool management, refer to [`az aks nodepool`](https://docs.microsoft.com/zh-cn/cli/azure/aks/nodepool?view=azure-cli-latest).

```

The two components are *not required* in the deployment. This section shows a quick start example.

### Add node pools

Add a node pool for TiFlash/TiCDC respectively. You can set `--node-count` as required.

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
# Create a TiFlash node pool with `nodeType` being `Standard_E8s_v4` or higher
az aks nodepool add --name tiflash \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 3 \
    --labels dedicated=tiflash \
    --node-taints dedicated=tiflash:NoSchedule

# Create a TiCDC node pool with `nodeType` being `Standard_E16s_v4` or higher
az aks nodepool add --name ticdc \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 3 \
    --labels dedicated=ticdc \
    --node-taints dedicated=ticdc:NoSchedule
```

### Configure and deploy

> + To deploy TiFlash, configure `spec.tiflash` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`. Following is an example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
+ To deploy TiFlash, configure `spec.tiflash` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`. The following is an example:
```

    ```yaml
    spec:
      ...
      tiflash:
        baseImage: pingcap/tiflash
        replicas: 1
        storageClaims:
        - resources:
            requests:
              storage: 100Gi
        tolerations:
        - effect: NoSchedule
          key: dedicated
          operator: Equal
          value: tiflash
    ```

    For other parameters, refer to [Configure a TiDB Cluster](configure-a-tidb-cluster.md).

    > **Warning:**
    >
    > TiDB Operator automatically mounts PVs **in the order of the configuration** in the `storageClaims` list. Therefore, if you need to add disks for TiFlash, make sure that you add the disks **only to the end of the original configuration** in the list. In addition, you must **not** alter the order of the original configuration.

> + To deploy TiCDC, configure `spec.ticdc` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`. Following is an example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
+ To deploy TiCDC, configure `spec.ticdc` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`. The following is an example:
```

For example:

```yaml
spec:
  ...
  pd:
    baseImage: pingcap/pd-enterprise
  ...
  tikv:
    baseImage: pingcap/tikv-enterprise
```

## Use other Disk volume types

Azure disks support multiple volume types. Among them, `UltraSSD` delivers low latency and high throughput and can be enabled by performing the following steps:

1. [Enable Ultra disks on an existing cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks#enable-ultra-disks-on-an-existing-cluster) and create a storage class for `UltraSSD`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
    kind: StorageClass
    metadata:
      name: ultra
    provisioner: disk.csi.azure.com
    parameters:
      skuname: UltraSSD_LRS  # alias: storageaccounttype, available values: Standard_LRS, Premium_LRS, StandardSSD_LRS, UltraSSD_LRS
      cachingMode: None
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    allowVolumeExpansion: true
    volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
    mountOptions:
    - nodelalloc,noatime
    ```

>     > you can add more [Driver Parameters](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver/blob/master/docs/driver-parameters.md) as required.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    You can add more [Driver Parameters](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver/blob/master/docs/driver-parameters.md) as required.
```

2. In `tidb-cluster.yaml`, specify the `ultra` storage class to apply for the `UltraSSD` volume type through the `storageClassName` field.

    The following is a TiKV configuration example you can refer to:

    ```yaml
    spec:
      tikv:
        baseImage: pingcap/tikv
        replicas: 3
        storageClassName: ultra
        requests:
          storage: "100Gi"
    ```

You can use any supported Azure disk type. It is recommended to use `Premium_LRS` or `UltraSSD_LRS`.

For more information about the storage class configuration and Azure disk types, refer to [Storage Class documentation](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver) and [Azure Disk Types](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types).

## Use local storage

Use Azure LRS disks for storage in production environment. To simulate bare metal performance, use additional [NVMe SSD local store volumes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes-storage) provided by some Azure instances. You can choose such instances for the TiKV node pool to achieve higher IOPS and lower latency.

> **Note:**
>

> > You cannot dynamically change the storage class of a running TiDB cluster. In this case, create a new cluster for testing.
> >
> > Local NVMe Disks are ephemeral, data will be lost on these disks if you stop/deallocate your node. When the node is reconstructed, you need to migrate data in TiKV. If you do not want to migrate data, it is recommended not to use the local disk in production environment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> * You cannot dynamically change the storage class of a running TiDB cluster. In this case, create a new cluster for testing.
> * Local NVMe Disks are ephemeral. Data will be lost on these disks if you stop/deallocate your node. When the node is reconstructed, you need to migrate data in TiKV. If you do not want to migrate data, it is recommended not to use the local disk in a production environment.
```

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    az aks nodepool add --name tikv \
        --cluster-name ${clusterName}  \
        --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
        --node-vm-size Standard_L8s_v2 \
        --zones 1 2 3 \
        --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
        --node-count 3 \
        --enable-ultra-ssd \
        --labels dedicated=tikv \
        --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule
    ```

    If the TiKV node pool already exists, you can either delete the old group and then create a new one, or change the group name to avoid conflict.

2. Deploy the local volume provisioner.

    You need to use the [local-volume-provisioner](https://sigs.k8s.io/sig-storage-local-static-provisioner) to discover and manage the local storage. Run the following command to deploy and create a `local-storage` storage class:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/master/manifests/eks/local-volume-provisioner.yaml
    ```

3. Use local storage.

    After the steps above, the local volume provisioner can discover all the local NVMe SSD disks in the cluster.

>     Modify `tikv.storageClassName` in the `tidb-cluster.yaml` file to `local-storage`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Add the `tikv.storageClassName` field to the `tidb-cluster.yaml` file and set the value of the field to `local-storage`.
```

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
az feature register --name EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver --namespace Microsoft.ContainerService --subscription ${your-subscription-id}
```

## Create a AKS cluster and node pools

most of the TiDB cluster components use Azure disk as storage, according to AKS [Best Practice Document](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/operator-best-practices-cluster-isolation), it is recommended to create a node pool with every availability zone (at least 3 in total) for each component when creating an AKS cluster.

### create AKS cluster with [CSI enabled](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/csi-storage-drivers)

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
# create AKS cluster
az aks create \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --name ${clusterName} \
    --location ${location} \
    --generate-ssh-keys \
    --vm-set-type VirtualMachineScaleSets \
    --load-balancer-sku standard \
    --node-count 3 \
    --zones 1 2 3 \

>     --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true

Reviewer: This parameter don't need when Kubernetes version >= 1.21

Author: Thank you,  have added note in 'cluster create' step

az aks nodepool add --name tikv2 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 2 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd

# create tikv node pool3 in zone 3
az aks nodepool add --name tikv3 \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 1 \
    --labels dedicated=tikv \
    --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule \
    --enable-ultra-ssd
```

> **Warning:**
>
> About node pool scale in:
>
> * You can manually scale an AKS cluster to run a different number of nodes. When you scale down, nodes are carefully [cordoned and drained](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/) to minimize disruption to running applications, refer [Scale the node count in an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/scale-cluster).

> ## 配置 StorageClass

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## StorageClass
```

Author: Thank you, have fixed the description in EN doc

> ## StorageClass configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Configure StorageClass
```

> **Note:**
>
> In addition to the bastion host, you can also connect an existing host to the cluster virtual network by [Peering](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/virtual-network-peering-overview). If the AKS cluster is created in an existing virtual network, you can use the host in the virtual network.

### Install the MySQL client and connect

After SSH to the internal host, you can access the TiDB cluster via the MySQL client.

1. Install the MySQL client on the host:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    sudo yum install mysql -y
    ```

2. Connect the client to the TiDB cluster:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell

>     mysql -h ${tidb-lb-ip} -P 4000 -u root

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    mysql --comments -h ${tidb-lb-ip} -P 4000 -u root
```

Author: why we need --comments here ?

Reviewer 5: With TIDB in general `--comments` is needed. This is because without that option comments are stripped before they are sent to the server. This causes problems as TiDB specific code like `/*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */` for TiDB and TiDB feature specific parts of statements. This is used by `SHOW CREATE TABLE...` etc.

While it might not be strictly required here, it would be good to add it anyway as it is a best practice to use `--comments` for all TiDB sessions as forgetting this might cause statements to *silently* behave differently which can be very frustrating for users and cause all kinds of issues. And you never know what a user might use the session for after doing this step of the docs.

Author: I see,  I reference the doc https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/stable/deploy-on-aws-eks#install-the-mysql-client-and-connect and I think it is better to maintain the same doc format now.   
The root cause that we need `--comments` is because the difference behavior between Mysql like code  `/*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */` ,  so I think it need a global talk about if we need add `--comments` and then fix all related docs once.

Author: So let's at least do the right command in newly added doc.

    ```

    `${tidb-lb-ip}` is the LoadBalancer ip of the TiDB service. You can view the ip in the `EXTERNAL-IP` field by executing `kubectl get svc basic-tidb -n tidb-cluster`.

    For example:

    ``` shell

>     $ mysql -h 20.240.0.7 -P 4000 -u root

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    $ mysql --comments -h 20.240.0.7 -P 4000 -u root
```

## Upgrade

To upgrade the TiDB cluster, edit the `spec.version` by executing `kubectl edit tc basic -n tidb-cluster`.

The upgrade process does not finish immediately. You can watch the upgrade progress by executing `kubectl get pods -n tidb-cluster --watch`.

## Scale out

Before scaling out the cluster, you need to scale out the corresponding node pool so that the new instances have enough resources for operation.

This section describes how to scale out the AKS node pool and TiDB components.

### Scale out AKS node pool

When scaling out TiKV, the node pools must be scaled out evenly among the different availability zones. The following example shows how to scale out the TiKV node pool of the `${clusterName}` cluster to 6 nodes:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
az aks nodepool scale \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --name ${nodePoolName} \
    --node-count 6
```

For more information on managing node pool, refer to [`az aks nodepool` documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/aks/nodepool?view=azure-cli-latest).

### Scale out TiDB components

> After scaling out the AKS node pool, execute `kubectl edit tc basic -n tidb-cluster`, and modify component's `replicas` to the desired number of replicas. The scaling-out process is then completed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After scaling out the AKS node pool, run the `kubectl edit tc basic -n tidb-cluster` command with `replicas` of each component set to desired value. The scaling-out process is then completed.
```

## Deploy TiFlash/TiCDC

[TiFlash](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tiflash-overview) is the columnar storage extension of TiKV.

[TiCDC](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-overview) is a tool for replicating the incremental data of TiDB by pulling TiKV change logs.

The two components are *not required* in the deployment. This section shows a quick start example.

> ### Add node pools
> 
> add a node pool for TiFlash/TiCDC respectively. `--node-count` is the number of nodes you desire.
> 
> {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}
> 
> ``` shell
> # create tiflash node pool, the suggested nodeType is Standard_E8s_v4 or higher
> az aks nodepool add --name tiflash \
>     --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
>     --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
>     --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
>     --zones 1 2 3 \
>     --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
>     --node-count 3 \
>     --labels dedicated=tiflash \
>     --node-taints dedicated=tiflash:NoSchedule
> 
> # create ticdc node pool, the suggested nodeType is Standard_E16s_v4 or higher
> az aks nodepool add --name ticdc \
>     --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
>     --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
>     --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
>     --zones 1 2 3 \
>     --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
>     --node-count 3 \
>     --labels dedicated=ticdc \
>     --node-taints dedicated=ticdc:NoSchedule

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Add node pools

Add a node pool for TiFlash/TiCDC respectively. You can set `--node-count` as required.

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
# Create a TiFlash node pool with `nodeType` being `Standard_E8s_v4` or higher
az aks nodepool add --name tiflash \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 3 \
    --labels dedicated=tiflash \
    --node-taints dedicated=tiflash:NoSchedule

# Create a TiCDC node pool with `nodeType` being `Standard_E16s_v4` or higher
az aks nodepool add --name ticdc \
    --cluster-name ${clusterName} \
    --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
    --node-vm-size ${nodeType} \
    --zones 1 2 3 \
    --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
    --node-count 3 \
    --labels dedicated=ticdc \
    --node-taints dedicated=ticdc:NoSchedule
```

```

### Configure and deploy

> + To deploy TiFlash, configure `spec.tiflash` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ To deploy TiFlash, configure `spec.tiflash` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`. Following is an example:
```

    ```yaml
    spec:
      ...
      tiflash:
        baseImage: pingcap/tiflash
        replicas: 1
        storageClaims:
        - resources:
            requests:
              storage: 100Gi
        tolerations:
        - effect: NoSchedule
          key: dedicated
          operator: Equal
          value: tiflash
    ```

    For other parameters, refer to [Configure a TiDB Cluster](configure-a-tidb-cluster.md).

    > **Warning:**
    >

>     > TiDB Operator automatically mount PVs **in the order of the configuration** in the `storageClaims` list. Therefore, if you need to add disks for TiFlash, make sure that you add the disks **only to the end of the original configuration** in the list. In addition, you must **not** alter the order of the original configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    > TiDB Operator automatically mounts PVs **in the order of the configuration** in the `storageClaims` list. Therefore, if you need to add disks for TiFlash, make sure that you add the disks **only to the end of the original configuration** in the list. In addition, you must **not** alter the order of the original configuration.
```

> + To deploy TiCDC, configure `spec.ticdc` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ To deploy TiCDC, configure `spec.ticdc` in `tidb-cluster.yaml`. Following is an example:
```

    ```yaml
    spec:
      ...
      ticdc:
        baseImage: pingcap/ticdc
        replicas: 1
        tolerations:
        - effect: NoSchedule
          key: dedicated
          operator: Equal
          value: ticdc
    ```

>     Modify `replicas` according to your needs.
> 
> Finally, execute `kubectl -n tidb-cluster apply -f tidb-cluster.yaml` to update the TiDB cluster configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Modify `replicas` as required.

Finally, run the `kubectl -n tidb-cluster apply -f tidb-cluster.yaml` command to update the TiDB cluster configuration.
```

For detailed CR configuration, refer to [API references](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/docs/api-references/docs.md) and [Configure a TiDB Cluster](configure-a-tidb-cluster.md).

## Deploy TiDB Enterprise Edition

To deploy TiDB/PD/TiKV/TiFlash/TiCDC Enterprise Edition, configure `spec.[tidb|pd|tikv|tiflash|ticdc].baseImage` in `tidb-cluster.yaml` as the enterprise image. The enterprise image format is `pingcap/[tidb|pd|tikv|tiflash|ticdc]-enterprise`.

For example:

```yaml
spec:
  ...
  pd:
    baseImage: pingcap/pd-enterprise
  ...
  tikv:
    baseImage: pingcap/tikv-enterprise
```

## Use other Disk volume types

> Azure disks supports multiple volume types. If you need low latency and high throughput, you can choose the `UltraSSD` type. The steps are as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Azure disks support multiple volume types. Among them, `UltraSSD` delivers low latency and high throughput and can be enabled by performing the following steps:
```

1. [Enable Ultra disks on an existing cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks#enable-ultra-disks-on-an-existing-cluster) and create a storage class for `UltraSSD`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
    kind: StorageClass
    metadata:
      name: ultra
    provisioner: disk.csi.azure.com
    parameters:
      skuname: UltraSSD_LRS  # alias: storageaccounttype, available values: Standard_LRS, Premium_LRS, StandardSSD_LRS, UltraSSD_LRS
      cachingMode: None
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    allowVolumeExpansion: true
    volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
    mountOptions:
    - nodelalloc,noatime
    ```

>     > you can add more [Driver Parameters](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver/blob/master/docs/driver-parameters.md) according to your needs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    > you can add more [Driver Parameters](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver/blob/master/docs/driver-parameters.md) as required.
```

2. In `tidb-cluster.yaml`, specify the `ultra` storage class to apply for the `UltraSSD` volume type through the `storageClassName` field.

    The following is a TiKV configuration example you can refer to:

    ```yaml
    spec:
      tikv:
        baseImage: pingcap/tikv
        replicas: 3
        storageClassName: ultra
        requests:
          storage: "100Gi"
    ```

> You can use any supported Azure disk type, It is recommended to use `Premium_LRS` or `UltraSSD_LRS`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use any supported Azure disk type. It is recommended to use `Premium_LRS` or `UltraSSD_LRS`.
```

For more information about the storage class configuration and Azure disk types, refer to [Storage Class documentation](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/azuredisk-csi-driver) and [Azure Disk Types](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types).

## Use local storage

> Use Azure LRS disk as a primary production configuration. To simulate bare metal performance, some Azure instance types provide additional [NVMe SSD local store volumes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes-storage). You can choose such instances for the TiKV node pool to achieve higher IOPS and lower latency.
> 
> > **Note:**
> >
> > You cannot dynamically change the storage class of a running TiDB cluster. You can create a new cluster for testing.
> >
> > Local NVMe Disks are ephemeral, data will be lost on these disks if you stop/deallocate your node. When the node reconstruction occurs, you need to migrate data in TiKV. If you do not want to migrate data, it is recommended not to use the local disk in the production environment.
> 
> For instance types that provide local disk, see [Lsv2-series](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/lsv2-series). Take `Standard_L8s_v2` as an example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use Azure LRS disks for storage in production environment. To simulate bare metal performance, use additional [NVMe SSD local store volumes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes-storage) provided by some Azure instances. You can choose such instances for the TiKV node pool to achieve higher IOPS and lower latency.

> **Note:**
>
> You cannot dynamically change the storage class of a running TiDB cluster. In this case, create a new cluster for testing.
>
> Local NVMe Disks are ephemeral, data will be lost on these disks if you stop/deallocate your node. When the node is reconstructed, you need to migrate data in TiKV. If you do not want to migrate data, it is recommended not to use the local disk in production environment.

For instance types that provide local disks, refer to [Lsv2-series](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/lsv2-series). The following takes `Standard_L8s_v2` as an example:
```

1. Create a node group with local storage for TiKV.

    Modify the instance type of the TiKV node pool in the `az aks nodepool add` command to `Standard_L8s_v2`:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    az aks nodepool add --name tikv \
        --cluster-name ${clusterName}  \
        --resource-group ${resourceGroup} \
        --node-vm-size Standard_L8s_v2 \
        --zones 1 2 3 \
        --aks-custom-headers EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver=true \
        --node-count 3 \
        --enable-ultra-ssd \
        --labels dedicated=tikv \
        --node-taints dedicated=tikv:NoSchedule
    ```

    If the TiKV node pool already exists, you can either delete the old group and then create a new one, or change the group name to avoid conflict.

2. Deploy the local volume provisioner.

>     You need to use the [local-volume-provisioner](https://sigs.k8s.io/sig-storage-local-static-provisioner) to discover and manage the local storage. Executing the following command deploys and creates a `local-storage` storage class:
> 
>     {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}
> 
>     ``` shell
>     kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/master/manifests/eks/local-volume-provisioner.yaml
>     ```
> 
> 3. Use the local storage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    You need to use the [local-volume-provisioner](https://sigs.k8s.io/sig-storage-local-static-provisioner) to discover and manage the local storage. Run the following command to deploy and create a `local-storage` storage class:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ``` shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/master/manifests/eks/local-volume-provisioner.yaml
    ```

3. Use local storage.
```

summary: Learn how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
aliases: ['/docs/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/deploy-on-azure-aks/']
---

# Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS

This document describes how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

To deploy TiDB Operator and the TiDB cluster in a self-managed Kubernetes environment, refer to [Deploy TiDB Operator](deploy-tidb-operator.md) and [Deploy TiDB in General Kubernetes](deploy-on-general-kubernetes.md).

## Prerequisites

Before deploying a TiDB cluster on Azure AKS, make sure the following requirements are satisfied:

* Install [Helm 3](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) for deploying TiDB Operator.
* [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and install and configure `az cli`.

    > **Note：**
    >
    > To verify whether AZ CLI is configured correctly, run the `az login` command. If login with account credentials succeeds, AZ CLI is configured correctly. Otherwise, you need to re-configure AZ CLI.

* [Create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks).

> * Install [Helm 3](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/): used for deploying TiDB Operator.
> * Complete all operations in [Create a Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and [Create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: These two item lists are redundant and should be removed.

Author: fixed

---
title: Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS
summary: Learn how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
---

# Deploy TiDB on Azure AKS

This document describes how to deploy a TiDB cluster on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

To deploy TiDB Operator and the TiDB cluster in a self-managed Kubernetes environment, refer to [Deploy TiDB Operator](deploy-tidb-operator.md) and [Deploy TiDB in General Kubernetes](deploy-on-general-kubernetes.md).

## Prerequisites

Before deploying a TiDB cluster on Azure AKS, perform the following operations:

* Install [Helm 3](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) for deploying TiDB Operator.
* [Deploy a Kubernetes (AKS) cluster](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster) and install and configure `az cli`.

    > **Note：**
    >
    > To verify whether AZ CLI is configured correctly, run the `az login` command. If login with account credentials succeeds, AZ CLI is configured correctly. Otherwise, you need to re-configure AZ CLI.

> * Ref [use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks) to create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks or enable Ultra disks in an exist cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Refer to [use Ultra disks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-ultra-disks) to create a new cluster that can use Ultra disks or enable Ultra disks in an exist cluster.
```

* Acquire [AKS service permissions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/concepts-identity#aks-service-permissions).
* If the Kubernetes version of the cluster is earlier than 1.21, install [aks-preview CLI extension](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/custom-node-configuration#install-aks-preview-cli-extension) for using Ultra Disks by running the following command:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    az extension add --name aks-preview
    ```

> * Register [EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/csi-storage-drivers#install-csi-storage-drivers-on-a-new-cluster-with-version--121) in [your subscription](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/feature?view=azure-cli-latest#az_feature_register-optional-parameters) by running the following command:

Reviewer 3: @yiduoyunQ “在您的订阅中注册过 **EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver** 功能”，这个也是 K8s 版本低于1.21时必须要做的吗？

Author: @shichun-0415   对的，根据 @it2911  反馈若 k8s version < 1.21， 需要手动通过 flg EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver 来启用 CSI feature，订阅中默认没有注册过 EnableAzureDiskFileCSIDriver 的功能，需要进行 “az feature register” ，因此在文档中进行说明

tidb-tidb-0                       2/2     Running   0          47h
tidb-tidb-1                       2/2     Running   0          46h
tidb-tikv-0                       1/1     Running   0          47h
tidb-tikv-1                       1/1     Running   0          47h
tidb-tikv-2                       1/1     Running   0          47h
```

## Access the database

After deploying a TiDB cluster, you can access the TiDB database to test or develop applications.

### Access method

- Access via Bastion

The LoadBalancer created for your TiDB cluster resides in an intranet. You can create a [Bastion](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/bastion/tutorial-create-host-portal) in the cluster virtual network to connect to an internal host and then access the database.

> **Note:**
>
> In addition to the bastion host, you can also connect an existing host to the cluster virtual network by [Peering](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/virtual-network-peering-overview). If the AKS cluster is created in an existing virtual network, you can use hosts in this virtual network to access the database.

- Access via SSH

> You can [create the SSH connection to a Linux node](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/ssh#create-the-ssh-connection-to-a-linux-node) then access to the database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can [create the SSH connection to a Linux node](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/ssh#create-the-ssh-connection-to-a-linux-node) to access the database.
```

- Access via node-shell

> You can simply use tools like [node-shell](https://github.com/kvaps/kubectl-node-shell) to connect to nodes in cluster, then access to the database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can simply use tools like [node-shell](https://github.com/kvaps/kubectl-node-shell) to connect to nodes in the cluster, then access the database.
```

> * By default, TiDB (starting from v4.0.2) periodically shares usage details with PingCAP to help understand how to improve the product. For details about what is shared and how to disable the sharing, see [Telemetry](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/telemetry).

## Access the Grafana monitoring dashboard

Obtain the LoadBalancer IP address of Grafana:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

```shell
kubectl -n tidb-cluster get svc basic-grafana
```

For example:

```shell
kubectl get svc basic-grafana
NAME            TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)          AGE
basic-grafana   LoadBalancer   10.100.199.42   20.240.0.8    3000:30761/TCP   121m
```

In the output above, the `EXTERNAL-IP` column is the LoadBalancer IP address.

You can access the `${grafana-lb}:3000` address using your web browser to view monitoring metrics. Replace `${grafana-lb}` with the LoadBalancer IP address.

> **Note:**
>
> The default Grafana username and password are both `admin`.

## Access TiDB Dashboard

> See [Access TiDB Dashboard](access-dashboard.md) for instructions about how to securely allow access to the TiDB Dashboard.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
See [Access TiDB Dashboard](access-dashboard.md) for instructions about how to securely allow access to TiDB Dashboard.
```

## Use local storage

Use Azure LRS disks for storage in production environment. To simulate bare-metal performance, use additional [NVMe SSD local store volumes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes-storage) provided by some Azure instances. You can choose such instances for the TiKV node pool to achieve higher IOPS and lower latency.

> **Note:**
>
> * You cannot dynamically change the storage class of a running TiDB cluster. In this case, create a new cluster for testing.
> * Local NVMe Disks are ephemeral. Data will be lost on these disks if you stop/deallocate your node. When the node is reconstructed, you need to migrate data in TiKV. If you do not want to migrate data, it is recommended not to use the local disk in a production environment.

For instance types that provide local disks, refer to [Lsv2-series](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/lsv2-series). The following takes `Standard_L8s_v2` as an example:

> 1. Create a node group with local storage for TiKV.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Create a node pool with local storage for TiKV.
```
